//ARTICLE 1
Japan’s Economy Shrank 1 Percent as Consumers Fled Covid The world’s third-largest economy lost momentum in the first three months of the year after the Omicron variant suppressed demand at home. TOKYO — Last December, after two years of stop-and-go growth, Japan’s economic engine seemed like it might finally be revving up. Covid cases were practically nonexistent. Consumers were back on the town, shopping, eating out, traveling. The year 2021 ended on a high note, with the country’s economy expanding on an annual basis for the first time in three years. But the Omicron variant of the coronavirus, geopolitical turmoil and supply chain snarls have once again set back Japan’s fragile economic recovery. In the first three months of the year, the country’s economy, the world’s third largest after the United States and China, shrank at an annualized rate of 1 percent, government data showed on Wednesday. A combination of factors contributed to the decline in growth. In January, Japan had put into place new emergency measures as coronavirus case numbers, driven up by Omicron, moved toward the highest levels of the pandemic. In February, Russia invaded Ukraine, spiking energy prices. And that was before China, Japan’s largest export market and a key supplier of parts and labor to its manufacturers, imposed new lockdowns in Shanghai, throwing supply chains into chaos. The contraction has not been as “extreme” as previous economic setbacks thanks to high levels of vaccine uptake and less wide-ranging emergency measures than during previous waves of the coronavirus, according to Shinichiro Kobayashi, principal economist at the Mitsubishi UFJ Research Institute. But Japan’s economic recovery from the enormous damage done by the pandemic has also not been as fast as the United States, China or the European Union, he said. “The pace has been slow,” he said, adding that Japan was the “only country among major economies that hasn’t recovered.” Growth is likely to bounce back strongly in the second quarter, analysts said, a pattern that has defined Japan’s economy during the pandemic: Demand has waxed as Covid cases have waned, and vice versa. Still, growth in the coming months will face some tough challenges. The pandemic and the war in Ukraine have fueled big increases in the costs of food and energy in Japan. And moves by the U.S. Federal Reserve to tackle high inflation have caused the value of the Japanese currency, the yen, to plummet. That has driven up costs in the resource-poor country, which is highly dependent on imports for food, fuel and raw materials. Inflation in the country, while still modest, is rising at its fastest pace in years, with consumer prices in Tokyo increasing by 2.5 percent in April. And over the last year, prices for producers have shot up 10 percent, the highest levels since 1980. China’s draconian efforts to keep Covid under control are likely to create additional disruptions for Japanese companies that manufacture, source parts and export their goods there. Consumer spending “will recover from the downward pressure, but because there are these negative factors, the question is how broad will that recovery be?” said Yoshiki Shinke, a senior economist at Dai-ichi Life Research Institute. Japan’s prime minister, Fumio Kishida, has tried to offset the effects of price increases with large government subsidies for fuel and cash handouts for families with children. But Japanese consumers, wary of the pandemic’s economic effects, have largely been putting rounds of stimulus money into savings. Japan’s growth is facing diverse challenges, but ultimately its recovery will depend on Covid, analysts said, a common refrain over the last two years. While Japan has high vaccination rates and has performed better than most other wealthy countries at keeping the pandemic in check, the virus’s protean nature has made it difficult to predict its path. And that has made experts hesitant to commit to any forecasts about its future impact on global economies. “The big risk is that corona starts to spread again,” said Naoyuki Shiraishi, an economist at the Japan Research Institute. “If a new variant appears, there will be new restrictions on activity, and that will suppress consumption.”

//ARTICLE 2
FOCUS: Japan economy to expand in 2022, but pandemic, chip crunch to weigh TOKYO - 
The Japanese economy is expected to accelerate its expansion in fiscal 2022 following a sharp turnaround toward the end of 2021 as private consumption continues to recover thanks to subdued coronavirus infections. Analysts predict the world's third-largest economy will see an annual real 2 to 4 percent growth in fiscal 2022 starting April, even though concerns remain about a COVID-19 resurgence and the lingering global semiconductor shortage. After the economy shrank a record 4.5 percent in fiscal 2020 with the coronavirus outbreak, it began to pick up in the fall of 2021 as vaccinations progressed and economic restrictions were lifted. The government predicts a 2.6 percent growth in fiscal 2021, followed by a 3.2 percent increase in fiscal 2022. Among other major economies, growth in calendar 2022 is forecast by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to reach 3.7 percent in the United States and 5.1 percent in China. Economists say strong growth is expected especially in the first half of 2022 in Japan, thanks to restaurants and bars and other hospitality businesses returning to normal operations and the government's stimulus initiatives, including the "Go To Travel" domestic tourism subsidy program which it envisages resuming around February. Taro Saito, executive research fellow at NLI Research Institute, said consumption, kept at subdued levels by the pandemic with increased savings, should lead to robust private spending going forward. "As long as people can move freely, considerable spending can be expected," Saito said. Japan's household assets hit a new record in 2020 and have continued to rise since, according to Bank of Japan data. At the end of September 2021, Japanese households held a record 1,999.8 trillion yen ($17 trillion), with cash and deposits increasing 3.7 percent from a year earlier to 1,072 trillion yen. Assets held in securities were also higher, helped by rises in stock prices. But economists say factors that stood in the way of the economic recovery through a large part of 2021 will not entirely go away in 2022. For one, the recently spreading Omicron variant of the coronavirus could dampen private spending, which accounts for more than half of the country's GDP. Mizuho Research & Technologies, which estimates the annual growth rate at 2.7 percent based on the premise that the next wave of infections -- the sixth since the outbreak in 2020 -- will occur in summer, forecasts an annualized 2.9 percent contraction in the July-September period. Saisuke Sakai, senior economist at Mizuho, said, "If a sixth infection wave is caused by the Omicron variant, we expect private expenditure to drop in early 2022." The highly-contagious Omicron variant has already caused a resurgence of infections in the United States and some European countries, forcing them to restrict social activities and cancel festive events. While the total number of confirmed cases involving Omicron remains low in Japan, community transmission is showing signs of increase in urban areas including Tokyo. But the decline in spending will likely be smaller than during previous waves when states of emergency were issued to ask people to stay at home and restaurants to close earlier, Sakai said, as the government is pushing its so-called "vaccine and test package" to support economic activities. Under the program, people certified as vaccinated or with negative tests would not be discouraged from traveling across prefectural borders and restaurants would be allowed to serve alcohol even during states of emergency if they check customers' vaccine and test statuses. Sakai said the economy may also enjoy stronger-than-expected boosts from the benefits of oral COVID-19 drugs developed by Pfizer Inc. and Merck & Co. and an expansion of vaccine use to children. A global chip shortage will also continue to be a concern, economists say. A recent gradual recovery in car production is a positive development for the Japanese economy after automakers cut output since summer due to supply chain disruptions in Southeast Asia. Many economists say the speed of the auto production recovery will remain mild, however, as global chip demand is expected to continue outstripping supply even if the COVID-19 situation in Southeast Asian countries, a key manufacturing hub for automakers, keeps improving. "Even if automakers could boost production briefly, it will be difficult to keep doing so to get back to their normal output level," said Yasunari Tanaka, a researcher at Mitsubishi Research Institute which forecasts the chip drought will be resolved in 2023 or later. Chip industry body World Semiconductor Trade Statistics forecasts semiconductor demand will grow 8.8 percent to a new record of more than $600 billion in 2022 following a 25.6 percent leap in 2021. Domestically, chipmaking capacity has surpassed its pre-pandemic level and little room is left for additional expansion, according to MRI. "I think it has become a main scenario, rather than a potential risk, to expect a prolonged global semiconductor shortage," Tanaka said. The currency market is another headache for the Japanese economy, Tanaka said. Although export-oriented automakers and chip-related companies can benefit from the recent weakness of the yen against the U.S. dollar, it is a headwind for Japan given its reliance on imports of natural resources such as crude oil, he said. Transportation and restaurant businesses, already hard-hit by the pandemic, are major consumers of crude oil and may remain under pressure, he said. Even though the Japanese economy is set to recover to its pre-pandemic level in early 2022, it will take a full year or longer to return to its recent peak marked in the April-June quarter of 2019, which was before the consumption tax hike to 10 percent from 8 percent later that year. "For 2022, the main goal for the Japanese economy would be achieving a 'with-corona' new normal, striking a balance between keeping the economy running and curbing infections," Mizuho's Sakai said.

//ARTICLE 3
Japan's Digitalization Can Add Momentum for Economic Rebound The Japanese economy is recovering from the pandemic as related uncertainty and supply constraints subside and consumption gradually rebounds. Growth will accelerate to 2.4 percent this year, the fastest in 12 years, and maintain nearly the same pace next year, according to our latest economic projections in April. Our recent assessment of the world’s third-largest economy credits strong policy support and high vaccination levels. Pent-up consumer demand will help support the expansion. However, the war in Ukraine following a continuing pandemic pose substantial risks to the near-term outlook. The economy also faces longer-term headwinds from an aging and shrinking population, stagnant productivity growth and major climate change risks. Japan’s many challenges highlight the importance of efforts to enhance growth that can foster inclusion, reduce inequality, and ensure a sustainable future. Our study shows that scaling up digital investment, along with full implementation of growth-enhancing reforms that increase labor supply and productivity, could boost gross domestic product. Digitalization, importantly, could provide additional growth momentum. The pandemic underscored Japan’s uneven embrace of technology. Even though it’s one of the world’s biggest users of industrial robots and home of a major electronics industry, it still lags other economies in adoption of digitalization by businesses (for example, continued reliance on legacy IT systems), government, and the financial sector. This structural weakness was further underscored by how many employers struggled to make the shift to remote work when the pandemic began, reducing economic output and sapping productivity at a crucial time. Paper-based procedures hindered government responses to the outbreak, delaying the 2020 emergency cash program that aided consumers. Adoption of cashless payments and e-commerce have also lagged. Accordingly, faster digital transformation with government support would boost productivity and growth. For example, lawmakers last year abolished most of the authorization of documents by Hanko seals, the personalized ink stamps used for centuries in Japan and similar to those in other Asian nations. This pivot to electronic signatures from traditional stamps is an important one because it allows for digitalizing administrative procedures that make government more efficient. Other initiatives include the Digital Agency, a body established in September under the cabinet to speed digitalization of central and local governments and the private sector. To ensure that this transition is inclusive, policy support should be carefully designed to mitigate any potential harm for unskilled workers. Other key priorities in accelerating adoption of digital financial services include enhancing public trust by augmenting financial and digital literacy; improving connectivity between different cashless payment platforms; and strengthening data privacy, consumer protection, and cybersecurity. Greater digitalization, however, will be best if it’s also combined with other growth-enhancing reforms that are important to address Japan’s demographic headwinds. Bringing more female, older, and foreign workers into the labor force should be a priority. Increasing training and career opportunities for those without lifetime employment, who are mostly women, will help raise productivity and wages. Better corporate governance and reduced regulation would boost productivity and investment. Looking ahead, Japan would need not only stronger growth, but also growth that is environmentally sustainable. Our study suggests a profound economic transformation built on significant green investments and more reliance on carbon pricing would further support a recovery from the pandemic, while creating a new and clean economic engine for the future. Japan’s commitment to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050 is therefore an important and positive step. Together, these policy objectives show how Japan can make the most of the disruptions from the pandemic to push through reforms that lift productivity and economic growth.

//ARTICLE 4
Japan's economy to suffer Q1 slump on lower consumption TOKYO, May 11 (Reuters) - Japan's economy likely contracted in the first three months of this year as the lingering fallout from the COVID-19 pandemic took a toll on consumption and exports, a Reuters poll showed. The weak reading will underscore the challenge policymakers face in pulling the world's third-largest economy sustainably out of the pandemic-induced doldrums. While the economy is likely to rebound in the current quarter, the outlook remains clouded by Russia's invasion of Ukraine that has led to a surge in commodity and fuel costs. Gross domestic product (GDP) likely shrank an annualised 1.8% in the January-March period after a 4.6% expansion in the previous quarter, according to analysts polled by Reuters. That would translate into a quarterly 0.4% contraction. "A big drop in consumption was mainly behind the contraction in January-March GDP, due largely to the outbreak of the Omicron variant," said Saisuke Sakai, senior economist at Mizuho Research and Technologies. "The recovery will remain moderate due to Japan's worsening terms of trade blamed on the Ukraine crisis and slowing global growth," he said. Private consumption, which accounts for more than half of GDP, likely fell 0.5%, largely because of the Omicron outbreak that forced the government to impose curbs on activity. External demand, or exports minus imports, likely knocked 0.3 percentage point off GDP growth, reflecting weak exports. Capital spending is expected to have risen 0.7% after a 0.3% increase in the previous quarter, according to the poll. Cabinet Office is expected to release the January-March GDP data at 8:50 a.m. on May 18 (2350 GMT May 17).

//ARTICLE 5
Why Japan’s Economy May Surprise Us In 2022 Though off to a decent start, Japanese Prime Minister Fumio Kishida faces a 2022 of profound challenges. Between Covid-19, sluggish economic growth, and geopolitical tensions with China, Kishida shouldn’t expect many calm moments in the year ahead. Oddly, though, Kishida’s biggest dilemma might be managing his relationship with Liberal Democratic Party kingpin Shinzo Abe. Japan’s longest-serving leader stepped down in September 2020 amid scandals and outrage over a weak pandemic response. Even so, Abe remains the behind-the-scenes powerbroker calling many of the shots in Tokyo. Kishida owes his premiership to “Shadow Shogun” Abe, who favored him over more popular rivals. Now, though, Kishida risks outshining Abe as a reformer. While Kishida outperforming would be great news for Japan’s 126 million people, it would mean crossing the thin-skinned Abe. In Tokyo’s factional politics, it’s not a reach to think Team Abe might try to limit Kishida’s room to operate. That’s particularly so if Kishida continues to take a less confrontational tack toward China, South Korea and rewriting Japan wartime history than Abe and his predecessors. For the moment, let’s look at why Kishida has exceeded the rather low expectations voters had when he assumed power in October. Right out of the gate, Kishida built on his immediate predecessor’s success in upping Japan’s vaccination rates. Whereas Abe dragged his feet, the government of 2020-2021 Prime Minister Yoshihide Suga raised Japan from Covid zero to hero. Today, Japan boasts a 78% vaccination rate. In less than three months, Kishida has articulated a clearer path to raising Japan’s economic game than Abe did in nearly eight years. For all its great press, Abenomics mostly prodded the Bank of Japan to open the monetary floodgates to give “trickle-down economics” another try. Kishida is devising a "new capitalism" plan to redistribute wealth toward the middle class. It includes incentivizing companies via tax benefits to share profits with workers. He’s also looking to cajole CEOs to swing for the economic fences with new research-and-development expenditures. The plot thickens when you consider the noises coming out of the BOJ that Abe restaffed back in 2013. Abe’s hand-picked governor, Haruhiko Kuroda, did all the heavy lifting. Most of it was aimed at a 30% drop in the yen versus the dollar. In recent days, Kuroda expressed a change of heart, realizing that the costs of currency devaluation outweigh the benefits. “The yen's depreciation might have an increasing negative impact on household income through price rises," Kuroda told business leaders last week. Yen declines make Japanese goods more competitive overseas and boost profits that companies earn overseas. But a weak yen pushes up import costs, damaging households and domestic retailers. “A quantitative analysis by the bank's staff shows that the effects of the yen's depreciation in terms of pushing up prices of durable goods have increased in recent years," Kuroda said. It’s worse than that: the growth boost from weak exchange rates removed the urgency for Abe to implement disruptive structural reforms. Abe shelved plans to loosen labor markets, catalyze innovation, reduce bureaucracy, increase productivity and empower women. The lack of muscle-building early in the Abe years left Japan extra-vulnerable to Covid recessions. Enter Kishida, who’s endeavoring to finish what Abe promised to start. First, of course, there's a need to support the economy in the short run. Last week, Kishida’s cabinet approved a record $940 billion budget for the next year’s aim of achieving growth and wealth distribution under his new capitalism agenda. It’s Japan’s biggest-ever initial spending plan, underlining a pivot from fiscal consolidation to a more sustainable gross domestic product rate. Japan, the third-largest economy, shrank 3.6% year-on-year in the July-September quarter amid a surge in Delta variant Covid-19 cases. That slammed consumption, which makes up more than half of the economy. Kishida’s government estimates growth of 3.2% in fiscal 2022-2023, up from an earlier estimate of 2.2%, which provided the basis for the budget plan. Yet might the Abe old guard take umbrage at Kishida outshining their man? Such pettiness—and sabotage—would be in keeping with the LDP’s factional ways. With any luck, Kishida can be his own man. This would mean putting some big economic reform wins on the scoreboard. It means distancing himself from Abe’s nationalistic tendencies which drove a wedge between Japan and Asian neighbors. Kishida succeeding is easier said than done. If he does, Japan’s economy could surprise the globe in 2022. And in a good way, for a change.
