//ARTICLE 1

Malaysia's economy to grow strongly in 2022, says Amro
KUALA LUMPUR: The Malaysian economy is expected to grow strongly this year, regaining momentum after the Delta strain of Covid-19 infections disrupted recovery in the third quarter of 2021, said Asean+3 Macroeconomic Research Office (Amro). Amro said while the country was currently experiencing a resurgence of infection by the Omicron variant, symptoms were much milder, thanks in large part to the high, almost 80 per cent vaccination rate of the population. "The continuing inoculation program and adequate healthcare capacity should keep the economy relatively open to allow for a sustained rebound in domestic demand. Accordingly, policies should be recalibrated to support a robust and sustainable recovery," Amro said today. These conclusions form the preliminary assessment by Amro after its virtual annual consultation with the Malaysian authorities in January and February this year. The Amro team, led by lead economist Dr. Sumio Ishikawa, director Toshinori Doi and chief economist Dr. Hoe Ee Khor, participated in the policy meetings. The discussions focused on Malaysia's recent economic developments and risks to recovery, continuing policy support in response to pandemic disruptions, and policy considerations as the economy transitions to an endemic Covid-19 phase. "We expect the Malaysian economy to grow by 6.0 per cent in 2022 from 3.1 per cent in 2021. This year's growth will be driven by a sustained rebound in domestic demand, as economic and social activities continue to recover despite the Omicron wave," Ishikawa said. "At the same time, Malaysia's exports should remain supported by buoyant global demand, as well as increased production capacity," he added. Amro said Malaysia was set to build on the recovery momentum that resumed toward the end of 2021 as mobility restrictions were lifted. In the final quarter of 2021, the economy expanded 3.6 per cent relative to the previous year. The expansion took hold despite the floods that hit several parts of the country in December. "Latest indicators suggest that manufacturing output and private consumption continued to grow in the first or second months of 2022," it said. Amro said due to the weaker recovery in 2021, Malaysian authorities had decided to pursue a more gradual pace of fiscal consolidation to support the economy. "The 2022 Budget will remain sizeable, amounting to RM332 billion (20.3 per cent of GDP), and the fiscal deficit will stay elevated at six per cent of GDP compared to the 2016-19 average of 3.3 per cent. Targeted cash assistance, wage subsidies, and job hiring incentive schemes will remain available to vulnerable groups," Amro said. The emergence of more virulent vaccine-resistant Covid-19 variants remained a major threat to economic recovery, although a tail risk, Amro said. The spike in global inflation also risks disrupting the strong external demand, as advanced economies pursue more aggressive monetary tightening that could lead to weaker growth. "Higher borrowing costs could likewise hold back the rebound in Malaysia's domestic demand as households and firms prioritixe debt servicing over spending and investment. In this risk event, fiscal policy will be left with limited space to further support the economy, given the already sizeable debt burden," it added. Amro said while supportive fiscal policy remains critical to narrow the disparity across sectors, a faster pace of fiscal consolidation over the medium term is warranted to ensure fiscal sustainability. In particular, revenue can be boosted by broadening the sales and services tax first, before eventually transitioning to the value-added tax, as the recovery becomes entrenched, perhaps starting in 2023.

//ARTICLE 2
Economic and Financial Developments in Malaysia in the First Quarter of 2022 The Malaysian economy grew by 5.0% in the first quarter (4Q 2021: 3.6%) The Malaysian economy registered a positive growth of 5.0% in the first quarter of 2022 (4Q 2021: 3.6%). This was mainly supported by improving domestic demand as economic activity continued to normalise with the easing of containment measures. The improvement also reflects the recovery in the job market, with the unemployment rate declining further to 4.1% (4Q 2021: 4.3%), as well as continued policy support. Strong external demand amid the continued upcycle in global technology provided further lift to growth. On the supply side, services and manufacturing sectors continued to drive economic growth, expanding by 6.5% and 6.6% respectively. On a quarter-on-quarter seasonally-adjusted basis, the economy grew by 3.9% (4Q 2021: 4.6%).

Headline inflation moderated to 2.2% during the quarter (4Q 2021: 3.2%). This mainly reflects the smaller contribution from the dissipating base effect from lower domestic retail fuel prices last year, and the absence of the base effect from electricity tariff rebates implemented in 2020. Core inflation increased to 1.7% during the quarter (4Q 2021: 0.8%). This reflects price adjustments amid the higher costs and improving demand conditions, with price increases being more noticeable specifically for food items due to supply-related factors such as higher global commodity prices. Exchange rate developments The ringgit depreciated by 0.7% against the US dollar in the first quarter of 2022 (YTD as at 11 May 2022: -4.7%), broadly in line with the movement of regional currencies (1Q 2022: -0.8%; YTD: -3.4%). This was due to the broad US dollar strength, driven by higher US interest rates, global risk-off sentiment given the conflict in Ukraine and expectations of modest growth in China. High commodity prices and Malaysia's recovery prospects had also cushioned the downward pressure on the ringgit from these external factors. Going forward, while domestic financial markets are subject to periods of high volatility, spillovers to domestic financial intermediation are expected to be contained. Malaysia’s strong external position and resilient banking system enable the economy to withstand external shocks. Financing conditions Net financing to the private sector grew by 4.5% (4Q 2021: 4.7%) amid lower growth in outstanding corporate bonds (4.6%; 4Q 2021: 5.4%). Outstanding loan growth was sustained at 4.4%. Business loan growth moderated to 4.3% (4Q 2021: 4.8%), reflecting lower growth in outstanding working capital loans amid continued high repayments growth. Growth in working capital loan disbursements, however, remained strong during the quarter (21.2%; 4Q 2021: 32.8%) in line with the recovery in economic activity. For households, outstanding loan growth increased across most purposes (4.8%; 4Q 2021: 4.2%), with robust growth in loan disbursements (12.7%; 4Q 2021: 9.5%). This reflects the continued demand for loans among households, particularly for the purchase of houses and cars. Household resilience continues to be supported by sound debt servicing capacity and healthy financial buffers at the aggregate level, with lending underpinned by prudent underwriting standards and loan affordability assessments by banks. The Malaysian economy is expected to improve further in 2022 Commenting on the outlook for 2022, Bank Negara Malaysia Governor Tan Sri Nor Shamsiah said, “The domestic economy is expected to improve further this year, with growth projected at 5.3% to 6.3% as announced in March 2022. This is underpinned by stronger domestic demand, continued expansion in external demand, and further improvement in the labour market. Growth would also benefit from the easing of restrictions, reopening of international borders and implementation of investment projects”. Nevertheless, risks to Malaysia’s growth momentum remain. These include a weaker-than-expected global growth, further escalation of geopolitical conflicts, worsening supply chain disruptions, adverse developments surrounding COVID-19 and heightened financial market volatility. For 2022, in an environment of high input costs and improving demand, headline inflation is projected to average between 2.2% and 3.2%. Underlying inflation, as measured by core inflation, is also expected to trend higher during the year, averaging between 2.0 to 3.0%. Several key factors are expected to partly contain upward pressure on prices, namely the existing price control measures and the continued spare capacity in the economy. Nonetheless, the inflation outlook remains subject to commodity price developments, arising mainly from the military conflict in Ukraine and prolonged supply-related disruptions. The outlook is also contingent on domestic policy measures on administered prices.

//ARTICLE 3
Malaysia Economy Overview Malaysia is the fourth-largest economy in Southeast Asia and the 39th largest in the world as of 2021. It is a newly industrialised market economy that is relatively open despite being state-oriented. The Malaysian economy has been steadily growing over the past years. The country saw its Gross domestic product (GDP) growth rising by 4.3% in 2019 after growing 4.8% in 2018. This was backed by several factors, including improvement in its labour market, sufficient spending on infrastructure, a pro-cyclical budget, and growing global demand for oil and gas, and electronics. Unfortunately, the Covid-19 pandemic, coupled with declining government expenditure and lower public and private investments, halted its growth trend in 2020 and even caused the economy to contract. The impact of the pandemic pushed the economy into negative territory, recording a 5.6% contraction in 2020. In 2021, GDP growth rebounded to 3.1%. As per the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the Malaysian economy is set to recover further from the Covid-19 downturn and projected a GDP growth of about 5.75% in 2022. Malaysia GDP Annual Growth Rate (in %) Malaysia’s population of over 32 million is significantly lower than its neighbouring ASEAN countries such as Indonesia, the Philippines, Vietnam, and Thailand. However, the country’s labour productivity is higher than these nations due to knowledge-based industries and its digital economy and the use of cutting-edge technology for manufacturing. Malaysian people enjoy an affluent lifestyle only rivalled by Singapore and Brunei. The government is aiming to raise income per capita to achieve a high–income country status. In 2021, the unemployment rate rose marginally to 4.6% from 4.5% in 2020, led by the reopening of the nation’s economy. The government anticipates the country’s unemployment rate to fall to 4% in 2022. Currency and Central Bank Malaysia’s official currency is the Malaysian ringgit or RM, which is divided into 100 sen. Prior to August 1975, it was called the Malaysian dollar and cents in English, until the official names were adopted. The Central Bank of Malaysia or Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM) in Malay serves as the country’s central bank. It was founded on January 26, 1959, as Central Bank of Malaya or Bank Negara Tanah Melayu. The central bank is tasked with issuing currency, formulating monetary policy, regulating Malaysia’s financial institutions and credit system. BNM is currently keeping the key interest rate at 1.75%, since July 2020 – which is a record low since 2004. Inflation increased by 3.2% year-on-year in December 2021, mainly due to the rise in food and fuel prices. As per the IMF, Malaysia’s inflation is projected to stabilize at about 2.5%, despite transitory supply-chain challenges. Industry and Trade 
Malaysia’s economy has long transitioned from an agricultural-centric phase in the 1960s into an industrial and services-driven one. Healthcare services, transport, distributive trade, and tourism are the main drivers of its service sector. It accounts for 54.77% of the country’s GDP in 2020 and employed 63% of its labour force. Meanwhile, Malaysia’s industrial sector makes up 35.9% of the GDP and provides 26.8% of the workforce. The country is considered one of the largest global exporters of semiconductor devices, electrical goods, and appliances. Agriculture employs 10.5% of Malaysia’s labour force. The country is still one of the top producers of palm oil, tropical wood, and rubber. However, its agricultural sector only contributes 7.4% of the GDP (as of 2020). Malaysia currently ranks 21st in total exports globally, with integrated circuits, refined petroleum, petroleum gas, semiconductor devices, and palm oil as its main export products. Its top export partners are Singapore, China, the US, Hong Kong, and Japan. Meanwhile, the country is ranked 25th in terms of total imports and its top import products are integrated circuits, refined petroleum, crude petroleum, broadcasting equipment, and coal briquettes. China, Singapore, Japan, the US, and Taiwan are its main import partners. Survey and Rankings Malaysia improved its ranking in the World Bank’s 2020 Ease of Doing Business 2020, rising from the 15th spot to the 12th. It increased its overall score from 81.3 to 81.5 and is now 3rd among countries in the East Asia and Pacific region. In the Heritage Foundation’s Index of Economic Freedom, Malaysia’s economy went up by two places from 24th freest in 2020 to 22nd in 2021, but its overall score declined by 0.3 points from 74.7 to 74.4. The country remained in the “Mostly Free” category. Stock Exchanges and Capital Markets Previously known as the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange, Bursa Malaysia is the sole stock exchange of Malaysia. It offers a wide range of products, including equities, derivatives, and exchange-traded funds (ETFs). In 2006, Bursa Malaysia partnered with FTSE Group to improve its previous Kuala Lumpur Composite Index (KLCI) and develop its current major index, the FTSE Bursa Malaysia KLCI, which is made up of the 30 largest listed companies based on market capitalisation. Bond Market 
Malaysia has a highly developed bond market and is the third-largest bond market in Asia, behind Japan and South Korea, in terms of bonds outstanding. Over 69% of the bonds outstanding comprise sovereign bonds, including quasi-government issued debt, while the remaining percentage is made up of corporate bonds. The government securities issued in the country are Malaysian Government Securities (MGS), Malaysian Government Investment Issues (MGII), Malaysian Treasury Bills (MTB), and Malaysian Islamic Treasury Bills (MITB). Local companies are also able to secure financing through the bond market by issuing bonds, medium-term notes, and commercial papers. Real Estate Market Purchasing real property in Malaysia has become more affordable. This was due to declining asking prices and attractive government incentives. The decline in price was further led by the central bank’s decision to maintain the accomodative policy stance. According to Bank Negara Malaysia’s financial stability analysis for the first half of 2021, more than 80% of housing transactions were for houses priced below $11,841. Meanwhile, Malaysia’s most costly housing are found in cities such as Kuala Lumpur, Selangor, Sarawak, Sabah, and Pulau Pinang. The government recently announced to continue implementing housing projects, especially for the low-income earners, with a total allocation of $357m.

//ARTICLE 4
Malaysia economy grows 5% in Q1 2022 KUALA LUMPUR -- Malaysia's gross domestic product expanded 5% in the first quarter of 2022 compared with the same period last year, its central bank announced on Friday, as the Southeast Asian economy continued to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic which had led to the closure of countless businesses and pushed up joblessness. The GDP figure for the January-March period was higher than the fourth quarter of 2021, when the economy grew 3.6% year-on-year, according to data released by the Bank Negara Malaysia. The result beats the 4% median estimate of 18 economists polled by Reuters. The economists' forecasts ranged from 2% to 5.7%, highlighting uncertainty over China's economic slowdown and the impact of Russia's invasion of Ukraine on output and activity. A separate Reuters poll released last month shows average growth estimates of 6.1% for the whole of 2022 and 5.0% for 2023. Malaysia's economy expanded 3.1% for the entire last year. The central bank is targeting growth of between 5.3% and 6.3% this year on hopes of a continued rise in global demand and higher private sector expenditure. The government's own official forecast is for a 5.5% to 6.5% expansion. Services and manufacturing were the primary sectors that performed better in the first quarter, central bank Gov. Nor Shamsiah Mohd Yunus said at a news conference on Friday. "The Malaysian economy grew by 5% in the first quarter, mainly driven by consumption activities amid the recovery in labor market conditions," she said. Nor Shamsiah said growth for the rest of the year will be supported by strengthening domestic demand, amid sustained export growth and the reopening of international borders. That growth, however, is subject to risks related to the emergence of new COVID-19 variants, heightened geopolitical tensions, global financial market volatility and supply chain disruptions, she added. UOB Global Economics and Markets Research had forecast GDP growth of up to 4.5% in the first quarter of this year, thanks to a sustained expansion of economic activities. Despite the omicron COVID wave in early February and the lingering impact of flash floods mid-December, January to March economic indicators suggested further improvement in real GDP, UOB economists wrote. They expect growth to be driven by sustained expansion in the services and manufacturing sectors while agriculture, mining and quarrying, and construction sectors continue to be sluggish. On Wednesday, the central bank increased its benchmark interest rate by 25 basis points to 2.0%, the first adjustment since slashing it to a historic low of 1.75% in July 2020. "It is important for us to start recalibrating interest rates now, rather than [making] an aggressive move at a later point. OPR has to be recalibrated with the realities on the ground, where the economy is now on a firmer ground and monetary policy is sound," the governor said. The bank also projected the country's headline inflation to rise to between 2.2% and 3.2% in 2022, as economic activity improves, although Malaysia also faces cost pressures and global price hikes due to the Ukraine war. Since March 2020, Malaysia has suffered four waves of COVID that had forced the closure of thousands of small businesses as nonessential economic activities were halted. In April, the government relaxed almost all COVID restrictions and economic activity has resumed fully.

//ARTICLE 5
Malaysia to keep growing amid potential headwinds from slowdown in major economies KUALA LUMPUR: As its economy grew faster than consensus projection in the first quarter, analysts now expect Malaysia's gross domestic product to expand more than 5.0 per cent this year. Even as the strength in the Q1 data was comforting, they cautioned that potential headwinds posed by a slowdown in the major economies were likely to present tougher times for the Malaysian economy. Malaysia reported Q1 gross domestic product (GDP) growth of 5.0 per cent year-on-year (yoy). OCBC Bank economist Wellian Wiranto said this came ahead of the 4.0 per cent and the 3.0 per cent that the market and the bank had expected respectively. While exports helped, the key factor in the outperformance was the recovery in the domestic consumption, bolstered by labour market normalisation, he added. Wellian expects Malaysia's full-year GDP growth at 5.7 per cent,  an increase from OCBC's earlier projection of 5.4 per cent. "Indeed, even as a recovery in growth momentum is something we usually pine for, especially after the challenging pandemic period, we should nonetheless be cognisant of the inherent risks when growth rates start to pick up quickly. "Here, apart from the risk of inflation that has been much talked about, the potential for current account dip presents another area to look out for," he said. In Q1, Malaysia's current account balance dipped to 0.7 per cent of GDP compared to 3.6 per cent in Q4 last year. "This marks the thinnest current account buffer since Q2 2016 and comes at a time when investors would pay greater attention to the metric. While Malaysia's current account should stay in the surplus territory, the fact that the cushion has gotten thinner could translate to more susceptibility to more volatile capital flows," Wellian said. UOB Group, meanwhile, said the local economy was on track for a 5.5 per cent full-year growth, barring any unexpected turn in the global outlook. This would be higher than the long-term 20-year average of 4.5 per cent and the official estimated potential growth of 3.0-4.0 per cent. UOB seniuor economist Julia Goh and economist Loke Siew Ting said Malaysia's GDP growth of 5.0 per cent in Q1 was much higher than its estimate of 4.5 per cent and Bloomberg market consensus of 4.0 per cent. "Despite expectations of slower global growth for this year, we think there are sufficient domestic growth drivers aided by reopening of the economy and transition to endemicity. "High national vaccination rates against Covid-19 and the continuation of targeted government policy support including cash aids, special Employees Provident Fund (EPF) withdrawal facility, and various subsidies will also help to underpin domestic growth momentum for the remaining quarters of the year," theyw rote in a report. Meanwhile, Goh and Loke expect Bank Negara Malaysia to next raise 25 basis points (bps) in overnight policy rate (OPR) hike during Q3 2022, after surprisingly increased the rate by 25bps to 2.0 per cent last Wednesday. "Our expectation takes cue from Bank Negara's objective to reduce the degree of monetary accommodation amid firmer domestic growth and that it will be done in a measured and gradual manner, ensuring that monetary support remains accommodative. This implies a total 50bps hike this year to bring the OPR to 2.25 per cent by year-end," they said.