//ARTICLE 1
How Qatar Manages Economic Growth and CO2 Emissions
For Qatar, is there a trade-off between economic growth and CO2 emissions? The linkage between economic growth and environmental degradation is a well-known topic. The burning question has become whether there is a trade-off between sustaining economic activities and maintaining the conditions of natural resources, or whether economic growth can go in harmony along with environmental protection measures. The direct interconnected relationship between fossil fuel consumption and environmental degradation has posed an interesting policy challenge.
Burning fossil fuels releases carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases that trap heat in the atmosphere, making them major contributors to climate change. On the other hand, high industrial activities, alongside rapidly increasing populations, put growing pressure on energy demand. The Example of Qatar Qatar has made remarkable economic achievements over the past few decades. Yet Qatar is facing a trade-off between boosting its economic growth and lowering its carbon dioxide emissions. Its strategic mandate to boost economic development, along with other areas related to sustainability, makes Qatar an interesting country to analyze. The World Bank defines Qatar as one of the richest countries in the world in terms of GDP per capita. Its economy is highly dependent on oil and gas production, which accounts for more than 50% of GDP, 85% of export earnings and 70% of government revenues. The country is also a major player in liquefied natural gas. Nonetheless, Qatar’s high dependence on fossil fuels has resulted in an increase in the CO2 emissions level when compared to global averages. Embed from Getty Images To combat the rising carbon emission percentages and lower environmental pressures, Qatar is introducing strict policy measures to achieve sustainable development through four central pillars: economic, social, human and environmental development. While many disruptions have occurred over the past few years, including fluctuations in oil and gas prices, economic downturns and a deadly pandemic, nobody expected an economic blockade. The Diplomatic Rift In June 2017, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain and Egypt cut diplomatic relations with Qatar. They prohibited Qatar-registered planes and ships from utilizing their airspace and sea routes, and the Saudis also blocked Qatar’s only land border. This point is of particular importance as the deterioration in relations among the Gulf neighbors urged Qatar to rethink its sustainable development goals while meeting local demand. At the beginning of the blockade, the country relied heavily on importing several commodities, especially food items. Later, it accelerated initiatives and programs to diversify the economy and reduce reliance on imports. Achieving carbon neutrality is also factored into all Qatar’s initiatives. For example, by the end of 2022, Qatar aims to deliver the first carbon-neutral FIFA World Cup in the history of the event. All stadiums and infrastructure are subjected to rigorous sustainability standards. Several air quality monitoring stations and extensive recycling programs are being introduced, along with the construction of the eight stadiums that will be used during the football tournament. Qatar has since become much more independent across several sectors, including food production and transport, making it a case study on how to transform challenges into opportunities for growth. Make Sense of the World Unique Insights from 2,500+ Contributors in 90+ Countries I agree to receive emails and other content from Fair Observer. I understand that I may repeal my consent at any time. You can review our Privacy Policy and Terms of Use for further information. This was also evident with total carbon emissions. According to my own analysis, carbon emission per capita fell by 13% as of 2018 from a historical record in 2000. Since then, total carbon emissions have increased as the economy has grown but at a slower rate, meaning that Qatar is undergoing expanding relative decoupling. In the 2008 to 2018 period, a 1% change in GDP resulted in a fall of CO2 emissions, from 0.65% to 0.44%. This drop is very relevant to Qatar as several measures have been applied, particularly over the last 10 years, to reduce emissions. A Reduction in Emissions While Qatar’s total emissions have declined over recent years, policies to increase energy efficiency, diversify the energy mix by introducing more renewables, support technological development to improve energy efficiency in a desert climate, and implement energy demand management programs to maintain the same trend of decline and achieve climate change objectives have been increasingly crucial. The heightened pressure caused by the blockade on Qatar is now over, but what is needed are more synergies and collective efforts across the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) to stimulate economic diversification and minimize carbon emissions. Member states of the GCC are sharing multiple environmental, social and economic factors that should incentivize them to cooperate to meet their climate change objectives and economic development goals.

//ARTICLE 2
Qatar central bank expects GDP growth of 3.5% in 2022 DOHA: Qatar’s gross domestic product should grow 3.5 percent in 2022, Central Bank Gov. Sheikh Bandar bin Mohammed bin Saoud Al-Thani told a conference on Sunday in Doha. The energy-rich Gulf emirate plans to start licensing financial technology companies soon, he added. Fitch Ratings in April forecast Qatar’s GDP would grow 3.2 percent in 2022, from 1.6 percent in 2021, reflecting increased output from the soccer World Cup that the country is hosting in November and December and the post-pandemic recovery. According to an Arab Monetary Fund report issued this year, the UAE, Saudi Arabia and Qatar were the most competitive Arab economies between 2017 and 2020. The report monitors the economic competitiveness of Arab countries and the government measures taken in this regard.

//ARTICLE 3
Qatar's economy grows by 2.6% in Q3 2021, lifted by non-hydrocarbon sector DOHA Jan 12 (Reuters) - Qatar's economy grew 2.6% year-on-year in the third quarter of 2021, according to official estimates, driven mainly by the non-hydrocarbon sector. On a quarterly basis, gross domestic product (GDP), based on constant prices grew by 4%, Qatar's statistical authority said Wednesday. Mining and quarrying GDP decreased by 0.7% year-on-year in the third quarter, while non-mining and quarrying activities grew by 4.7% in the third quarter.Accommodation and food service activities saw the biggest annual jump, growing 29.8%, reflecting the continued recovery of a sector hit badly by coronavirus-related restrictions in 2020. Transportation and storage activities followed close behind, with a 29.7% growth, while manufacturing grew 6.1%. Qatar, a major producer of liquified natural gas, posted a surplus of $247 million in the third quarter, the finance ministry said in November, which was lifted by higher energy prices. 

//ARTICLE 4
Maximizing In-Country Value: The Key To Qatar's Economic Future In line with Qatar's 2030 Vision, in-country value is an economic localization strategy that seeks to foster and retain economic activity and investment within the domestic economy, thereby minimizing expenditure on foreign goods and services. Qatar has made enormous strides in recent years towards building a diversified and resilient economy capable of delivering long-term sustainable growth and prosperity for all. Since 2008, when Qatar unveiled its 2030 Vision, the country has seen a flourishing of commercial activity across a growing range of domestic industries and sectors, from infrastructure development and financial services, to healthcare, technology, consumer goods, and more. It is essential that Qatar continues this diversification process to move the country away from its historical dependence on domestic oil and gas revenues and on international imports of goods and services. The global economy is evolving, as consumer appetites and stakeholder expectations continue to shift. Amidst this uncertainty, geopolitical tensions persist. Only by building a vibrant, high-tech, high-skilled domestic economy will Qatar be able to fully ensure its economic security for decades to come. While progress has undoubtedly been made, there is still work to be done. Maximizing in-country value (ICV) remains critical to the long-term development of Qatar's economy and national security. In line with Qatar's 2030 Vision, ICV is an economic localization strategy that seeks to foster and retain economic activity and investment within the domestic economy, thereby minimizing expenditure on foreign goods and services. In simple terms, ICV prompts Qatari companies to hire, buy and invest locally. ICV is a key catalyst for Qatar's economic self-development, bringing a wide range of benefits in commercial, technological and human capital terms. Principally, ICV helps drive economic growth and diversification by boosting demand for local products and services, not least from small and medium-sized enterprises. In doing so, it delivers the additional benefits of upskilling the local population, and helping create a culture innovation and entrepreneurship within the national economy. These benefits are also felt regionally within Qatar, helping spread economic activity in areas outside existing commercial centers such as Doha. The cascading effects of this in-country economic activity helps enhance productivity, skills and training throughout the economy and its workforce, both geographically and in terms of sectoral expertise. Indeed, as Qatar's domestic industries continue to blossom and thrive under the effects of ICV approaches, we are already seeing foreign direct investment rising. As international capital increasingly seeks to enter the Qatari market, Qatar is able to put in place agreements with international entities around technology transfer and knowledge sharing that embeds global expertise into the Qatari economy, heightening Qatari domestic capabilities still further. A virtuous cycle ensues, fueling sustainable economic growth and human capital development towards Qatar's primary objective: a mature, technologically advanced knowledge economy. There is no better example of how Qatar's ICV strategy has revolutionized the domestic economy than in the country's rapidly developing healthcare sector. At one of my enterprise's companies, Elegancia Healthcare, we have embraced ICV as a clear operating principle for how we do business. This approach is exemplified in our ongoing delivery of The View Hospital, Elegancia's milestone luxury healthcare development in Doha's Al Qutaifiya district. Scheduled to open in 2022, the hospital provides an important example of how ICV thinking is being made a reality in Qatar's ongoing economic growth. At every stage of the hospital's construction, Elegancia Healthcare is partnering with key local suppliers and providers to procure core goods and services, from raw materials and machinery, to advanced clinical technology. Our recent agreement with leading radiology equipment supplier Ali bin Ali Medical is the latest demonstration of Elegancia Healthcare's commitment toward working with local in-country partners, helping promote domestic economic growth and supply chain resilience across Qatar. Further such partnerships have been announced in recent days and weeks, including with Mannai Corporation and Khalid Scientific, to supply neonatal equipment and operating room technology respectively. Moreover, The View Hospital will itself be operated in partnership with Cedars-Sinai, the internationally renowned healthcare group based in Los Angeles, thereby exemplifying the principle of how key commercial projects can be structured to bring strategically important global expertise into the Qatari economy. The road ahead is clear for Qatar. Prioritizing and enhancing in-country value will continue to have a galvanizing effect on Qatari economic and social development for many years to come. ICV represents Qatar's roadmap for growth, and we call on organizations across the economy to do all they can to embed it into their commercial decision making.

//ARTICLE 5
Remarkable performance of Qatar’s economy in 2021 Doha: Despite the repercussion of the COVID-19 pandemic, which continued to threaten the world’s economies during 2021, the Qatari economy recorded a remarkable positive performance at various levels due to rational policies, a flexible economic approach to crisis management, and forward-looking plans, which enhanced Qatar’s ability to quickly recover and adapt to changes, ensure business continuity and complete vital projects in the infrastructure sector and other sectors. It was not surprising that Qatar ranked first in the Gulf region in COVID Economic Recovery Index, scoring four points, according to the global economic magazine ‘MEED’ published last August. The index confirmed that Doha is the holder of the highest score in the economic recovery index, as its revenues depend mainly on natural gas, not oil, making its financial position more robust. This economic and financial performance was reflected in the reports of credit rating institutions, as the country maintained its high rank in credit ratings and a stable future outlook for its economy, based on its financial position, which provided it with protection from potential risks, as well as the continuous development of the energy sector. In its latest reports, the World Bank also expected that the Qatari economy would grow by 3 percent in 2021 and accelerate its pace by 4.1 percent in 2022 and 4.5 percent in 2023 after absorbing the shocks caused by the pandemic and returning again to the growth trend. The quarterly figures indicate that the country’s GDP achieved remarkable growth in the second quarter of 2021 at a rate of 5.4 percent, QR156.3bn, compared to QR148.3bn in the first quarter. The contribution of the oil and gas sector accounted for 36.8 percent, a growth of 11 percent, while the total non-oil sectors accounted for 63.2 percent, with a growth rate of 2.4 percent. The industrial sector, which is one the main forces of development, witnessed remarkable growth after its contribution to the GDP increased from 7.3 percent in 2020 to 8.7 percent in the first half of 2021, to occupy the fourth place as the highest contributing activity to the country’s economy during the current year. This reflects the efficacy of the measures taken by the State that supported the growth of various vital economic sectors in light of the steady steps towards achieving economic diversification in accordance with the determinants of the National Development Strategy and Qatar National Strategy for Manufacturing Industry 2018-2022. In 2021, Qatar has strengthened its leadership position in the international energy markets and established itself as one of the most important suppliers of clean energy in the world. In this context, Qatar Petroleum announced the change of its name to Qatar Energy to reflect the major transformations in the energy industry locally and in line with global trends. The company has signed agreements to build more than 100 new gas tankers until 2027, in parallel with a contract for the first phase of its North Field expansion project, which will raise the country’s production of liquefied natural gas to 110 million tons annually by 2025 and in light of the efforts to raise its production of liquefied gas to reach 126 million tons annually by 2027. Qatar Energy has also signed, during current year, several agreements to carry out marine exploration operations off the Egyptian, Canadian, Cypriot and Namibian coasts and in two marine areas in the Republic of Suriname. It also signed a number of agreements to supply a number of countries with Qatari gas, including China, Pakistan and Bangladesh.