//ARTICLE 1
Commodities and energy sectors will drive Canada's economic growth in 2022, new report shows However, fragile economic conditions suggest Canada must strike a balance between short-term gains and long-term stability. Despite the economic benefits, high fuel prices are causing the clean energy transition to gain steam. Canadian companies are showing increasing commitment to ESG principles, though how they'll integrate those principles remains unclear. TORONTO, May 17, 2022 /CNW/ - RSM Canada ("RSM"), a leading global provider of audit, tax and consulting services focused on middle market businesses, today launched its second 2022 edition of 'The Real Economy, Canada' – a quarterly report that provides Canadian businesses with economic analysis and insights into how the nation's middle market can navigate through complex economic and geopolitical conditions. With Canada playing a delicate economic balancing act between short-term growth and long-term stability, the second edition of this year's 'The Real Economy: Canada' report examines the uncertain financial terrain ahead for Canadian businesses despite the competitive advantages held by the energy and commodities sectors, and to what extent inflation will be an economic factor for the rest of 2022. The report also shines a light on how Canada stands to gain economically from swelling global agriculture commodity demand resulting from geopolitical tensions, the greater role federal and provincial governments will need to play in the clean energy transition, and how Canadian companies are attempting to integrate ESG principles into their operations and financial reporting. Key findings in this quarter's report include: Canada's middle market is bracing for tighter economic conditions An overheated Canadian economy and global inflationary pressure have the Bank of Canada committed to increasing short-term interest rates and shrinking the size of its balance sheet. Canadians can expect another rate hike in the Bank of Canada's June announcement, though inflation will remain at six per cent for the coming months before effects of rising interest rates are felt. Increased day-to-day costs and higher mortgage rates should dampen consumer spending and investment in the housing market, all of which should moderate growth and temper inflation. Key indicators suggest that financial conditions are below normal, meaning a drag on the economy in the coming quarters is likely as the tendency to borrow or lend declines. Canada is in a position to satisfy swelling global agricultural commodity demand as a result of Russia's invasion of Ukraine Canada produces many of the same agricultural products that are suddenly in short supply – such as potash, grains and cooking oils – and could be in position to replace some of the lost exports on the global market. Canadian agricultural commodity producers stand to benefit from higher prices given high demand and strained supply abroad, with European companies already looking to secure contracts with Canada suppliers. Canada and the United States can alleviate global food insecurity caused by geopolitical disruptions if they can increase production and exports of essential commodities. However, achieving an increase in production will face obstacles, such as the of impact of higher North American labour and energy costs on commodity prices, and the impact of climate change on grain production. Transition to clean energy and away from ballooning fuel costs will require greater government action Rising fuel costs – triggered by rising carbon tax rates and Russia's war against Ukraine – is causing demand for electric vehicles to outstrip supply, rising faster than demand for gas vehicles. However, Canadian oil consumption remains steady due to the lack of readily available fuel-efficient vehicles, indicating greater government investment and incentives are required to encourage a large-scale clean energy transition. Despite current fuel prices, the federal carbon tax can help Canadian consumers and businesses transition from fluctuating oil and gas prices toward a more sustainable economy based on renewable energy. Oil and gas have played a big role in Canada's recent inflation surge, with just the exclusion of energy dropping Canada's inflation number from 5.7 per cent to 4.4 per cent. Canadian companies appear committed to sustainability, yet are unsure of how best to put ESG into practice A 2021 RSM report showed dramatic rise in middle market business executives who said they were familiar with ESG, increasing from 39 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2019 to 69 per cent in the third quarter of 2021.
However, the practice of how firms integrate ESG at an operational level, including into the investment decision-making process, is still in its infancy. Stakeholders are demanding that companies start to report on ESG factors in a much more structured way. Businesses that wish to be serious about ESG must understand at a quantitative level how they embed sustainability into their operations and how they have aligned their success to their stakeholders' success. "Amid geopolitical tensions and surging inflation, the Canadian economy is well positioned to grow this year given its competitive advantages in the commodities and energy sectors," says Tu Nguyen, economist and ESG director with RSM Canada. "For this reason, a rate hike is a given in the Bank of Canada's next announcement in June, and a 50 basis-point increase would not be out of the question." Nguyen continues: "Russia's invasion of Ukraine has destabilized global food markets by disrupting production and trade flows, putting Canada – as well as the United States – in a position to replace some of the agricultural products currently in short supply. North American businesses that produce agricultural commodities will need to look ahead and prepare accordingly, whether by increasing production or securing future contracts, as global food supplies are disrupted into next year."

//ARTICLE 2
Leading Experts Weigh In On Growing Canada’s Economy In 2022 Last year, strong vaccination uptake and the reopening of the economy helped Canada rebound from the Covid-19 pandemic slowdown. In the OECD's latest figures, Canada's economy grew by 4.8% in 2021—but remained lower than the OECD’s and global averages of 5.3% and 5.6%, respectively. Targeted government support programs boosted household incomes and enabled business recovery, providing stability and resiliency to the economy. However, inflationary pressure, virus variants, and an uneven sectorial recovery pose ongoing short- and medium-term challenges to growth. According to the OECD's Economic Survey of Canada 2021, these challenges could be elevated should the fallout from hard-hit sectors such as leisure, travel, and entertainment begin to impact the rest of the economy. However, fiscal stimulus measures and growth in the United States—Canada’s largest trade partner—could help boost export-oriented industries, a core component of the national economy. The OECD has forecasted that, in 2022, Canada’s economy will expand by 3.8%. Compared to last year, that expansion is expected to be lower than the global average of 4.5%, but on par with the OECD average. Despite recovery signals, Canada continues to face lingering pre-pandemic structural issues related to inclusive growth, energy transition, and healthcare. Furthermore, the fallout from the Covid-19 crisis negatively affected Canada’s fiscal balance, with the federal government’s debt-to-GDP ratio rising from 31.2% in 2019–20 to 50.7% in 2022–23, requiring at least in the medium run a clear road map for managing debt to head off risks to fiscal sustainability and to reassure markets. As part of the economic recovery and the need to address ongoing structural economic challenges in Canada, leading experts are highlighting measures that attract investment, particularly in export-oriented SME industries, promote the development of clean energy solutions, and provide more resources to the healthcare system would facilitate growth in the Canadian economy. Broadening global collaboration can help attract investment and drive business growth Before the pandemic, World Bank figures showed that Canada's gross fixed capital formation (investment) rate declined from 3.5% in 2017 to 0.3% in 2019. Last year, the risks and uncertainties caused by the Covid-19 pandemic, coupled with volatility in the global energy markets, negatively impacted investment in the Canadian economy, leading to a drop in the investment rate to -3.7% in 2020 and below the United States at -1.5%, but at close parity with the OECD average of 3.9%. As the economy rebounds, Canada's investment rate has started to recover and is expected to reach 0.3% in 2022; it is still projected to remain below the OECD average of 4.4% and the United States at 3.8%. For Canada to take the lead in tomorrow's global economy, new research from the C.D. Howe Institute highlighted that addressing investment challenges—that remain feeble compared to the United States and other countries—will be critical in driving competitiveness and productivity growth in the economy. According to Michael Tremblay, President & CEO at Invest Ottawa, "given the significant contribution (50%) of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) to Canada's GDP, along with being export-oriented and a source of innovation within the economy, enabling these SMEs to access global markets where they can commercialise at large scale would help attract investment into the economy." However, despite their critical role within Canada's economy, only 11.7% of SMEs export their goods and services because of ongoing challenges to identifying and pursuing new business opportunities in international markets. To help break through the barriers facing SMEs in a dynamic and increasingly protectionist economy, Sonya Shorey, Invest Ottawa’s Vice President of Strategy, says, "Canada must foster increased collaboration with stakeholders on the ground in international markets. This is critical to help SMEs more easily access new partners, investors, customers and related commercial opportunities in an ever-changing global economy." Shorey added, "SMEs would then be in a better position to build key relationships, deploy their products and showcase market adoption to attract investment, and generate new global revenues that help build the Canadian economy." Given the fundamental shifts expected from the Fourth Industrial Revolution, Canada must keep pace with technological change to successfully compete in a "winner-take-all" economy, requiring upskilling the workforce and developing solutions for tomorrow's economy. For these reasons, Tremblay pointed out, "Canada will need to leverage regional and sectorial expertise, particularly in life sciences, smart mobility, digital technology, clean energy and advanced manufacturing in building an ecosystem that brings together policymakers, commercial and post-secondary partners to improve collaboration and knowledge sharing within the economy." For instance, Tremblay noted that the Ottawa Hospital's partnership with the Sheba Medical Center (Israel), Area X.O, and its CAV Talent Catalyst Program has brought in best practices to address healthcare challenges and improve innovation in smart mobility. By strengthening global and regional collaborations that help Canadian companies develop cutting-edge solutions, Tremblay said, "Canada will become an attractive place for investment that creates skilled jobs and growth in the economy." Capitalise on the clean energy sector’s potential amidst a shifting global landscape In Clean Energy Canada and Navius Research's latest report, the clean energy sector is projected to grow by almost 50% and employ 639,200 people under the federal government's new climate plan by 2030. A significant portion of the growth in jobs is forecasted in clean transportation, with the number employed expected to reach 364,000, out of which 184,000 people are set to be in electric vehicle (EV) technology alone. As the trend to electrify the transportation sector grows globally, the International Energy Agency (IEA) and Bloomberg have both noted strong uptake in EV technology among Canada's trade partners, namely the European Union and the United States. However, for Canada to take advantage of the opportunities that lie ahead, the clean energy sector will need to scale up quickly and integrate its solution within the economy, which remains a problem because companies cannot gauge their full environmental benefits and potential for financial returns until the technology is at a large enough commercial stage. The hurdles to scaling up for the clean energy sector also constrain their expansion into foreign markets because potential buyers look for existing commercial usage in Canada. To help address these bottlenecks faced by the industry, Jane Kearns, VP, Growth Services at MaRS, said in an interview, "Canada needs to start by quickly resolving a few important areas, such as existing regulatory obstacles and skills shortages to enable the uptake and development of clean energy solutions within the country." In addition, to improve commercial adoption, Kearns added, "the government procurement of Canadian cleantech solutions that are exercised within WTO rules would be extremely beneficial for the sector. It would help Canadian companies provide a customer reference point that can be used to showcase domestic uptake and, importantly, reduce investment risk to access capital from VCs and debt financing institutions, which is a crucial element required by companies to scale up, build competitive products, and create new jobs." Additionally, given the growing usage of EVs and the demand for lithium−ion batteries in the coming years, Kearns highlighted, "Canada's economy would benefit from building a globally competitive EV industry that leverages an established history of automaking to manufacture EVs for local and international markets." Recently, as supply chain constraints have showcased the importance of strong commercial linkages, Kearns noted, "Canada's proximity and trading relations with the United States and Europe position the EV industry well." However, to drive the EV sector's value in global markets, Kearns remarked, "Canada should look to sustainably extract large deposits of lithium in subsurface brine in Alberta that would not only create major opportunities for the region but also broaden the appeal for doing business with Canada as countries look to transition toward a low-carbon economy." Improve healthcare data gathering to guide public policy consensus Based on a review by the Canadian Public Health Association (CPHA) of Canada's initial response to the Covid-19 pandemic, key findings revealed that public health measures were constrained by the lack of surveillance and monitoring tools, which at the start of the pandemic led to difficulties in obtaining first-line data on the evolution of the situation and coordinating a pan-Canadian approach to public health policy. Furthermore, CPHA's review found challenges regarding the type of data being collected and, at times, did not identify the socio-economic characteristics of those being tested, notably economic status and ethnicity, which generated an incomplete picture of the outbreak and limited the capacity to target programs to meet the needs of those most affected or at risk and to identify health inequities. Moreover, as new variants, such as Delta and Omicron, have emerged, the disproportionate socio-economic impact on poorer households has begun to resurface, highlighting C.D. Howe Institute's cautionary note last year to improve healthcare data and information gathering to help authorities respond to emerging health crises more efficiently. To address ongoing healthcare challenges and plan for future contingency measures, Prativa Baral, Epidemiologist and PhD Candidate at Johns Hopkins School of Public Health said in an interview that "Canada would benefit from more standardized and centralized data collection tools that accurately provide local, regional, and national governments with timely information to enable health experts evaluate potential outbreaks faster and reduce duplication of efforts across the country." By improving coordination among federal, provincial, and territorial governments to securely and safely gather the required information, Baral added, "healthcare resources can be allocated more efficiently and policy decisions streamlined. This will help decision-makers manage public needs more equitably in an evolving pandemic and bring consistency to the measures being adopted by various public health agencies." With the emergence of Omicron and previous variants, the evolving nature of the Covid-19 pandemic has highlighted the importance of having a strong health infrastructure equipped to manage not just the medical side but also other social determinants of health. According to Baral, "It will be critical for Canada to adequately invest in all aspects of the public healthcare system to support the overall well-being of the population, and better prepare for the next health crisis." However, in recent years, Canada's investment in the public healthcare system has lagged compared to most peer nations, contributing to resource constraints and difficult decisions being made during the Covid-19 pandemic that negatively impacted Canadians. For these reasons, Baral noted, "overcoming these shortcomings needs to be addressed because only after having the appropriate mechanisms in place for safeguarding public health can the economy at-large benefit from a productive and healthy workforce." Given the ways digital technologies are being harnessed to support the public health response to Covid-19, Baral also highlighted that "one way to improve these shortcomings in the system would be to leverage technology in improving healthcare response and outcomes, which combined with public healthcare data, would allow new solutions to be developed and critically support innovation in the sector." Special thanks to Aleksandra Dysko, Epidemiologist for providing a background overview of infectious diseases and the initiatives taken during the initial Covid-19 outbreak in Canada. 

//ARTICLE 3
Inflation, economy outrank COVID as top issues for Canadians: Nanos After more than two years of COVID-19, the pandemic is no longer a top concern for Canadians, with issues such as inflation and the economy ranking higher on their list of priorities, recent polling from Nanos Research shows. Eleven per cent of Canadians now say jobs and the economy are their top issues, followed by health care at 9.5 per cent, inflation at nine per cent and peace or fear of war at 8.3 per cent. Coronavirus currently ranks as the fifth most important issue for Canadians at seven per cent, down from the top spot at 13.1 per cent in March. At that time, free speech and freedom emerged as the second-most common issue at 8.3 per cent, likely a result of the "Freedom Convoy" protests in Ottawa and across the country. Now, five per cent of Canadians cite free speech and freedom as their top issue. Speaking on the Trend Line podcast, pollster Nik Nanos said this shift toward inflation and the economy speaks to Canadians' greater focus on domestic issues. Approximately half of Canadians believe the economy will get weaker in the next six months, he said, while about two-thirds say the value of real estate will go up. "Roll those two things together and what do you get? People saying that the economy is going to get weaker, but that the cost of living, the value of real estate, the cost to get into the market is going to get tougher and tougher in the next six months," Nanos said. The polling comes as the Bank of Canada raised its key interest rate by half a percentage point to one per cent on Wednesday, as the spike in energy and other commodity prices, as well as Russian President Vladimir Putin's invasion of Ukraine, help to fuel inflation. Inflation climbed to 5.7 per cent in February, up from 5.1 per cent in January, Statistics Canada reported previously. Additional polling by Nanos for Bloomberg News also shows many Canadians, when asked about the cost of living going up, are experiencing some form of hardship. While 48 per cent say inflation has not been a major problem, 21 per cent say it has become difficult to afford basic necessities, eight per cent have had to cancel a major purchase because of increasing prices and 20 per cent say both have occurred. A number of Canadians feel left out and anxious about the future, Nanos said, with some, namely Conservative leadership contender Pierre Poilievre, speaking to these concerns with a "populist-style" message. Poilievre recently filmed a video in Vancouver talking about home ownership falling out of reach for many Canadians. The video has been viewed on Twitter more than 421,000 times as of Wednesday afternoon. "And I think what we're seeing is parties from all stripes — leadership aspirants from different parts of the conservative movement — are looking to tune into that, and to connect with that, and to show voters that they have a plan to deal with the difficulty that many Canadians are dealing with," Nanos said. The Nanos issue tracking poll is based on 1,057 random phone interviews of Canadians 18 and older, up to April 1, 2022. The data is based on a four-week rolling average, with the oldest group of 250 interviews dropped each week and a new group of 250 added in. The survey is accurate plus or minus three percentage points, 19 times out of 20. The Nanos poll for Bloomberg is based on telephone and online random surveys of 1,000 people, between March 18 and 20, 2022, accurate within three percentage points, 19 times out of 20. You can find a new episode of Trend Line every second Wednesday on CTVNews.ca, YouTube and wherever you get your podcasts.

//ARTICLE 4
Canada's economy eked out slight growth to start 2022, despite Omicron Despite ongoing pandemic, economy has now expanded for 8 months in a row Canada's economy managed to eke out a slight expansion to kick off 2022, as goods-producing industries continued to churn out growth even as most service sectors were walloped by the Omicron variant of the coronavirus. Statistics Canada reported that the country's gross domestic product expanded by 0.2 per cent in January. That's the eighth straight increase in a row, after the data agency revised December's data up to a tiny 0.1 per cent increase, from flat previously. Output in goods-producing industries expanded by 0.8 per cent in the month, led by construction. The service sector, meanwhile, was hit hard by lockdowns and capacity restrictions related to limiting the spread of COVID-19. Businesses in the food, accommodation, arts, entertainment and recreation sectors saw their economic activity decline by 10 per cent or more in January as people stayed home. While those types of in-person services have borne the brunt of the economic pain since the start of the pandemic, the good news is that they seem to have rebounded in February and beyond. Preliminary data suggests the economy grew by 0.8 per cent during that month, led by increases in manufacturing, mining, quarrying, oil and gas extraction, accommodation and food services, and construction. "Despite the Omicron wave, the Canadian economy was able to keep its foot on the gas in January. And, by February, it was again time to hit the accelerator," economist Royce Mendes with Desjardins said of the numbers.

//ARTICLE 5
Minister Khera highlights investments in Good Jobs, Clean Air and a Strong Economy in Budget 2022 Through Budget 2022: A Plan to Grow Our Economy and Make Life More Affordable, the Government of Canada makes targeted and responsible investments to create good jobs, grow our economy, clean our air and build a Canada where nobody gets left behind. Today, Minister of Seniors Kamal Khera met with stakeholders at the Gander International Airport to discuss investments in Budget 2022 for clean air and a strong economy. The first pillar of the budget is investing in Canadians and making life more affordable. Budget 2022 housing measures will put Canada on the path to double housing construction over the next decade; help Canadians save for and buy their first home; ban foreign investment in Canadian housing; and curb unfair practices that make housing more expensive for Canadians. Budget 2022 also invests in ensuring Canadian workers have the skills they need for the good-paying jobs of today and tomorrow, and will make it easier for the skilled immigrants that our economy needs to make Canada their home. The Budget makes further significant investments in affordable child care, in our public health care system, and in advancing reconciliation with Indigenous peoples. Second, Budget 2022 invests in economic growth and innovation—the key to Canada’s long-term prosperity. This includes launching a new world-leading Canada Growth Fund that will attract tens of billions of dollars in private investment in Canadian industries and Canadian jobs, and a new innovation and investment agency that will help drive productivity and growth across our economy. The budget also proposes to implement Canada’s first Critical Minerals Strategy—one that will create thousands of good jobs and capitalize on a growing need for the minerals used in everything from phones to electric cars. Measures also include steps to build more resilient supply chains, and to cut taxes for Canada’s growing small businesses. The third pillar of Budget 2022 is investing in a clean economy. To help Canadians and Canadian businesses benefit from the global transition to a clean economy, Budget 2022 includes new incentives for the development of clean technologies and carbon capture, utilization, and storage. In addition to further investments to protect our land, lakes, and oceans, the government will also make it more affordable for Canadians to purchase zero-emission vehicles, build and expand a national network of zero-emission vehicle charging stations, and make new investments in clean energy. Canada entered the pandemic with the lowest net debt-to-GDP ratio of all G7 countries—an advantage that has since increased relative to other countries. Canada has seen the best jobs recovery in the G7, and as of March 2022, has recovered 115 per cent of the jobs lost at the height of the pandemic, with an unemployment rate that sits at just 5.3 per cent—the lowest rate on record since 1976. With Budget 2022, Canada will maintain this leading position, and maintain its fiscally responsible approach to economic growth and to building an economy that works for everyone. Crucially, it upholds the government’s fiscal anchor—a declining debt-to-GDP ratio and the unwinding of COVID-19-related deficits, which will ensure that Canada’s finances, remain sustainable in the long-term.Quotes “Budget 2022 is about growing our economy, creating good jobs, and building a Canada where nobody gets left behind. Our plan is responsible and considered, and it is going to mean more homes and good-paying jobs for Canadians; cleaner air and cleaner water for our children; and a stronger and more resilient economy for years to come.” – Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance, Chrystia Freeland “As we continue to build back from the COVID-19 pandemic, creating good middle-class jobs and making smart climate investments is essential for economic recovery and long-term prosperity. Budget 2022 is making the necessary investments that are good for the Canadians of today and tomorrow. – Minister of Seniors, Kamal Khera Quick facts Measures in Budget 2022 to make housing more affordable include: Putting Canada on the path to doubling the construction of new homes in the next decade; Helping Canadians buy their first home, including by introducing the Tax-Free First Home Savings Account and doubling the First-Time Home Buyers’ Tax Credit;
Launching a new Housing Accelerator Fund that will target the creation of 100,000 net new housing units in the next five years; Developing a Home Buyers’ Bill of Rights and bringing forward a national plan to end blind bidding; Banning foreign buyers from owning non-recreational residential property for two years; and A Multigenerational Home Renovation Tax Credit that will provide up to $7,500 in support for constructing a secondary suite or apartment.
Measures in Budget 2022 to fight climate change include: More than $3 billion in funding to make zero-emission vehicles more affordable and build a national network of charging stations; Significant new investments to protect our land, lakes, and oceans; and The creation of the Canada Growth Fund to help attract tens of billions of dollars in private capital towards building a net-zero economy by 2050. Further significant measures in Budget 2022 include: $5.3 billion over five years to provide dental care for Canadians with family incomes of less than $90,000 annually, starting with under 12 years-olds in 2022, expanding to under 18 years-olds, seniors, and persons living with a disability in 2023, and with full implementation by 2025. The program would be restricted to families with an income of less than $90,000 annually, with no co-pays for those under $70,000 annually in income;
Up to $3.8 billion to implement Canada’s first Critical Minerals Strategy; $11 billion in additional funding to continue to support Indigenous children and their families, and help Indigenous communities continue to grow and shape their futures; More than $8 billion in new funding to better equip the Canadian Armed Forces, strengthen Canada’s contributions to our core alliances like NATO and NORAD, and reinforce Canada’s cyber security; Further support for Ukraine and its people in the face of Russia’s illegal invasion, including up to $1 billion in new loan resources to the Ukrainian government through a new Administered Account for Ukraine at the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and an additional $500 million in military aid; A temporary Canada Recovery Dividend, representing a one-time 15 per cent tax on  the 2021 taxable income above $1 billion of Canada’s largest banking and life insurers’ groups, to help support Canada’s broader recovery; and A permanent 1.5 percentage point increase in the corporate income tax rate of banking and life insurance groups on taxable income above $100 million.