//ARTICLE 1
Singapore's growth outlook for 2022 dented but not derailed by war in Ukraine: MAS
SINGAPORE - The mayhem caused by the war in Ukraine has dented trade-dependent Singapore's growth outlook, but the Republic's major easing of Covid-19 curbs will allow the domestic economy to pick up some of the slack, the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) said on Thursday (April 28). MAS, hence, maintained its forecast for the Singapore economy to grow by between 3 per cent and 5 per cent this year, barring further disruptions caused by the Ukraine war or a severe worsening of the pandemic. "The projected growth outcome represents a moderation from the 7.6 per cent expansion in 2021, but would still be above trend for the second consecutive year," MAS said in its biannual macroeconomic review report. The central bank said Russia's invasion of Ukraine has mainly hit supplies of commodities such as food grains, oil and gas, and industrial metals - stoking inflation worldwide. "Supply shocks arising from the Russia-Ukraine conflict have introduced renewed uncertainties surrounding the outlook for the rest of the year, at a time when global supply chain frictions arising from the pandemic have yet to be fully resolved." MAS said the supply-driven price shocks are eroding real incomes and could depress demand for goods and services, and investment flows. For instance, the Business Optimism Index compiled by the Singapore Commercial Credit Bureau dipped slightly in the second quarter of 2022 to 5.35 percentage points, from 5.91 in the previous quarter, primarily due to the geopolitical uncertainty from the war in Ukraine exacerbating risks of global supply chain disruptions. Also, inflation in Singapore spiked to a 10-year high in March, resulting in an aggressive tightening of monetary policy by the MAS earlier this month to cap the surge in prices. However, MAS' confidence that the economy remains on track to grow by 3 per cent to 5 per cent, as projected by the Ministry of Trade and Industry, comes from Singapore's resolve to live with Covid-19. The policy led to a major easing of domestic safe management measures and border restrictions at the end of March, boosting hopes of a revival of Singapore's retail and travel-related industries. "Reduced restrictions will bring forward the projected recovery in the domestic-oriented and travel-related sectors to the second quarter, earlier than the previous expectation of the second half of this year," MAS said. "The drivers of growth should broaden to the domestic-oriented and travel-related clusters over the course of this year. Accordingly, sectors which bore the brunt of the pandemic are projected to stage a more decisive recovery and contribute more significantly to gross domestic product growth in 2022 compared with last year," MAS added. Still, higher input costs could curtail manufacturing here, while high inflation and weaker confidence could also restrain domestic consumption and investment, MAS warned. Consumer prices in Singapore saw a spike last month on the back of higher food, services and private transport costs. MAS said it expects core inflation to pick up sharply in the coming months, but moderate in late 2022, "reflecting in part some stabilisation of commodity prices and possible easing of supply constraints". At its monetary policy review two weeks ago, MAS had raised its inflation forecast for the year. It now expects core inflation to come in at 2.5 per cent to 3.5 per cent, up from the 2 per cent to 3 per cent expected in January. Overall inflation is forecast at 4.5 per cent to 5.5 per cent, from the earlier range of 2.5 per cent to 3.5 per cent. The authority in April also tightened its monetary policy for the third time since October - in a move to curb imported inflation. On the war in Ukraine, MAS said the fallout will hit most of Singapore's external-oriented sector but the key electronics sector has shown some resilience. MAS said that unlike the petrochemical and transport industries, the semiconductor sector's reliance on oil or energy is smaller. Instead, the exposure of the semiconductor industry to Russia and Ukraine comes from their role as major suppliers of two crucial inputs - Russia produces 37 per cent of the global supply of palladium and Ukraine supplies 70 per cent of neon. However, Singapore imports palladium mainly from Britain and the United States, rather than Russia, although some of Singapore's palladium suppliers may themselves be importing from Russia, MAS said.
"In general, the constricted global supply of resources implies that future purchases would possibly need to be secured at higher unit prices," it added. Major global chip companies such as Micron, UMC and GlobalFoundries, which have a production presence in Singapore, have thus far indicated limited disruptions as they have stockpiled raw materials and diversified sourcing since Russia's annexation of Crimea in 2014. However, given that the global information technology industry is in its third year of expansion, a longer upturn than previous cycles, global chip sales growth is expected to moderate in the coming quarters from the rapid pace in 2021, MAS said. Overall, growth in Singapore's major trading partners is not expected to be derailed. "Demand in the advanced economies should stay well-supported by the buffer provided by household savings and wealth accumulated during the pandemic," MAS said.

//ARTICLE 2
Commentary: Singapore should focus on economic growth rather than redistributing a smaller pie as it reopens Government assistance in 2020 and 2021 has put a floor beneath vulnerable sectors and families. But Singapore must focus on growing the economy as it reopens, says Faizal Yahya. SINGAPORE: When Singapore was hit by the full brunt of the pandemic over 2020, the Government provided huge policy support measures for households and companies. This not only prevented workers from being displaced but stopped growth-oriented companies from ceasing operations altogether. This support has continued in sectors recovering at a slower pace such as aviation and the tourism industry. In order to achieve this, Budget 2020 saw the roll out of four supplementary budgets in quick succession to tide the country over needed COVID-19 restrictions. However, there are questions over the sustainability of such an approach given the Singapore economy’s contraction of 5.4 per cent in 2020. Resorting to tapping on past reserves have also raised concerns over financing extra government expenditure. Despite stronger growth forecasts, the Government announced at Budget 2021 it will also draw S$1.7 billion more from the reserves. In February, Deputy Prime Minister Heng Swee Keat highlighted that income inequality measures in terms of the Gini coefficient in Singapore fell from 0.398 in 2019 to a historic low of 0.375 in 2020 due to “massive transfers” and schemes aimed towards supporting lower-income groups. Such transfers took the form of continued subsidies to lower–income groups such as the Workfare Income Supplement (WIS) scheme, top-ups to earnings and CPF accounts, as well as one-off financial support for households experiencing a loss of income that tap on the COVID-19 Support Grant, not to mention waivers on HDB loans and support for charities. Most of this increase in social expenditure has been funded by reliance on Net Investment Return Contributions (NIRC), Singapore’s largest revenue source that has exceeded all forms of taxes including the goods and services taxes (GST). DILEMMA BETWEEN FOCUSING ON REDISTRIBUTION AND FOCUSING ON GROWTH Nonetheless, some critics argue public policy should focus more on redistributive measures to help low-income families. But how much is enough? In Singapore, the top 10 per cent of income earners contribute about 80 per cent of all personal income tax. These are redistributed through schemes such as Workfare, GST vouchers, as well as ongoing subsidies for the lower and middle-income households in education, housing and healthcare among others. As Ong Ye Kung highlighted in 2018 as Education Minister, low-income families (up to the 20th percentile) receive about S$4 in benefits for every dollar of tax that they pay. Middle-income families (from the 41st to 60th percentile) receive S$2 for every tax dollar. This rate of distribution is higher that the S$1.3 to S$1.40 that middle-income households received for every tax dollar in the UK, US and Finland. Moreover, any such redistributive focus should be balanced with an attendant focus on economic transformation and growth to expand revenue streams. Given that the global economy is facing resurging rates of COVID-19 infections due to the Delta variant, Singapore’s growth prospects face strong headwinds and could be varied and unpredictable. China’s growth forecasts have been slashed by investment banks last week. While US GDP growth rose at 6.5 per cent year-on-year in the second quarter, this came well below expectations. In such an environment, wanting to have more to redistribute in the future requires our economy to ready our sails when the winds pick up, and enable every Singaporean to reach their fullest potential. We need to grow the pie so each portion can be bigger. This is why Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong’s National Day message focusing on inclusive growth is a useful one. His emphasis on supporting low-wage workers to reskill to seize new opportunities to achieve job progression and income wage strikes a pragmatic tone. GOING DIGITAL THE MOST STRAIGHTFORWARD WAY TO BOOST GROWTH
In Singapore, the lingering adverse economic impact of COVID-19 coupled with maturing conditions that have slowed growth even before the pandemic, had thankfully resulted in earlier government policies to restructure the economy. The challenge is transforming the economy to meet challenges of Industry 4.0 through digitalisation to create higher-value, higher-paying jobs. It was fortuitous that the digitalisation drive started in earnest a few years before the pandemic because it enabled more businesses to work remotely and safely when firms had to make that overnight leap with the imposition of a circuit breaker last April. Companies that embraced digitalisation were better prepared to source alternative revenue streams on e-commerce platforms, transform their business models to reduce operational costs and reach out overseas remotely to explore new market opportunities and trade collaborations. (“I feel sad seeing my dining room empty ... But you must get over that to run the business and work in reality.” Summer Hill SG chef-owner Anthony Yeoh talks about fresh challenges these past 18 months on CNA's Heart of the Matter.) Two in five who implemented digitalisation initiatives in 2020 experienced stronger revenue growth than non-adopters, a UOB study on small and medium enterprises released in March shows. Those who had digitalised their entire business or multiple areas reported stronger growth than those that went digital only in one area. In contrast, six in 10 that did not adopt any digitalisation saw a decline in their 2020 revenues compared to a year before. There is little wonder why when digitalisation can power trade-oriented Singapore SMEs’ search for new growth opportunities outside of our small domestic market and even reach consumers in Singapore, irrespective of whether COVID-19 restrictions come down. BUT NEW BUG BEARS OF GOING DIGITAL HAVE EMERGED
However, the process of digitalisation has also raised concerns even as it has enabled work to continue – primarily over remote-working for knowledge workers. More workers in Singapore have returned to work this past week. Firms know remote working has its limitations given the isolation, longer hours and inability to physically meet co-workers. A survey conducted by Microsoft in late 2020 found that Singapore workers topped the list in Asia facing increased burnout. This same survey highlighted 37 per cent of respondents in Singapore citing a lack of separation between work duties and personal obligations impacting their well-being. Authorities around the world have issued health advisories and provided resources for workers to manage stress over their work commitments. Calls for a four-day work week, a mental health day off and others advocating for a rebalancing of work and life have grown. This concern over public health must be tackled. Companies must support knowledge workers better when strong morale is a prerequisite for a productive, innovative and resilient workforce. The pandemic has already showed that economic activity and public health (social distancing) go hand in hand. Our vaccination rates must stay high to reach “herd immunity” levels for Singapore to continue lifting curbs on economic activities like dining in, working in offices and safely open for foreign travel to grow the economy. KEEPING THE ECONOMY GOING One example of how government assistance has been critical to keeping warm specific strategic capabilities for when the pandemic blows over is this: Changi Airport staff have maintained our aviation hub running despite the wholesale collapse of air travel. Being ready on the draw will put Singapore in a strong position. The winds are picking up when Singapore just announced on Thursday (Aug 19) the start of quarantine-free travel to Germany and Brunei for fully vaccinated travellers. Little wonder Singapore Airlines had prepared to increase its flight capacity in recent weeks. There is no doubt our demographic and economic trends will require more spending for redistributive policies going forward but we need to balance this with economic growth as our economy transforms for a post COVID-19 scenario. Singapore’s GDP growth forecast has been upgraded to 6 to 7 per cent last week, on the back of news that the economy rebounded in the second quarter of 2021 by 14.7 per cent. We should ride on this positive momentum to grow our revenue streams. In a volatile and uncertain world, Singapore must shore up our reserves to be better prepared to meet the challenges of the next global crisis. Dr Faizal Yahya is a Senior Research Fellow at the Institute of Policy Studies, Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy, National University of Singapore. 

//ARTICLE 3
Barclays expects ‘big jump’ in Singapore growth after Covid measures are lifted Easing measures will mean mobility at recreational areas and workplaces, which could lift GDP by 3% to 4%, says Brian Tan, Barclays’ senior regional economist. Resumption of international travel can also potentially fill 4% of GDP, he added.
However, domestic inflation pressures, tight labor market and rising global commodity prices will “set the stage” for the Monetary Authority of Singapore to implement aggressive policy tightening in April. SINGAPORE — Singapore is set to reopen its international borders and ease Covid restrictions next week, and that’s going to be its “biggest economic driver for growth,” according to Brian Tan, senior regional economist at Barclays. “By our estimates, if we get mobility at places like recreational areas and workplaces going up by just 10%, you’re going to get growth of about 3% to 4% of GDP. That’s a fairly big jump,” Tan said on CNBC’s “Street Signs Asia” on Friday. Starting March 29, people will be able to gather socially in groups of 10 instead of the current 5-person limit. More employees will be able to return to offices and capacity limits for large events will also be increased, Singapore’s Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong announced Thursday. “We’re also expecting that the resumption of international travel … there’s a gap of about 4% of GDP that could potentially be filled,” Tan added. However, with that growth comes domestic inflation pressures, along with an already tight labor market and rising global commodity prices. “That’s going to set the stage for the Monetary Authority of Singapore to implement fairly aggressive policy tightening in April,” said the analyst referring to the country’s central bank. Analysts from research firm Capital Economics and DBS Bank also said on Friday they are expecting MAS to tighten policy at its meeting next month following the listing of restrictions. “We think that is going to be positive for the currency,” Tan said. The Singapore dollar was trading at $1.356 Singapore dollars against the greenback. Singapore’s benchmark index, the Straits Times’ Index, was 0.5% higher on Friday, a day after the slew of announcements on easing measures. All fully vaccinated travelers and non-fully vaccinated children aged 12 and below can also enter Singapore without having to apply for entry approvals starting April 1. Tan added that the reopening of borders will pave the way for a “good macroeconomic outlook” in Singapore, by helping to attract more foreign direct investments. “The fact that we are able to reopen ahead of some of the other economies in Asia also suggests that it cements some of the safe haven status that Singapore has.”

//ARTICLE 4
Singapore economy expands 3.7% in Q1 SINGAPORE: The Singapore economy grew by 3.7% year-on-year in the first quarter of 2022, moderating from the 6.1% expansion in the previous quarter, the republic’s Ministry of Trade and Industry said. In releasing the republic’s economic performance in first quarter 2022 today, the ministry also maintained the 2022 gross domestic product (GDP) growth forecast at 3.0 to 5.0%, with expansion likely to come in at the lower half of the forecast range. On a quarter-on-quarter seasonally adjusted basis, the republic’s economy expanded by 0.7%, slower than the 2.3% growth in the fourth quarter of 2021. The manufacturing sector, among others, increased by 7.1% year-on-year, extending the 15.5% growth in the previous quarter. “Growth during the quarter was supported by output expansions in the electronics, transport engineering, general manufacturing and precision engineering clusters, which outweighed output declines in the biomedical manufacturing and chemicals clusters,” it said. The construction sector rose by 2.1% year-on-year, easing from the 2.9% growth in the previous quarter, as both public and private sector construction activities picked up during the quarter. The transportation and storage sector surged by 5.9% year-on-year, a moderation from the 7.5% growth clocked in the fourth quarter. “Within the sector, the air transport segment saw a strong pick-up in activity as the number of air passengers handled at Changi Airport rose sharply following the further easing of border measures,” the ministry said. Meanwhile, the finance and insurance sector, expanded by 4.0% year-on-year, moderating from the 5.6% expansion in the previous quarter. The ministry said since February, the external economic environment has deteriorated, due in part to the onset of the Russia-Ukraine war. In particular, the ministry said the conflict has disrupted the global supply of energy, food and other commodities, which has in turn exacerbated global inflationary pressures and adversely affected the growth of many economies. Meanwhile, stringent measures implemented in China to contain its domestic Covid-19 outbreaks are likely to weigh on its economy and contribute to global supply bottlenecks. “Consequently, global supply disruptions are projected to be more severe and prolonged than earlier expected, potentially persisting throughout 2022,” it said. In the US, the ministry said GDP growth is projected to moderate in 2022 while the growth outlook of the Eurozone economy has weakened, again due to the Russia-Ukraine conflict. As for the growth of Southeast Asian economies such as Malaysia, Indonesia and Thailand, the ministry projected they will improve in 2022. It will be supported by a pick-up in domestic demand with the easing of public health measures in these economies, as well as sustained demand for their merchandise exports, the ministry said. Domestically, the ministry noted that there are sectors in the Singapore economy that have seen a strengthening of their growth outlook, among others, the electronics cluster. The cluster is expected to expand more strongly than earlier projected, bolstered by robust global demand for semiconductors from the 5G and automotive markets, as well as cloud services and data centres, it said. Taking into account the performance of the Singapore economy in the first quarter, as well as the latest global and domestic economic developments, the ministry said it continues to expect the Singapore economy to grow by 3.0 to 5.0% in 2022, although growth is now more likely to come in at the lower half of the forecast range. - Bernama

//ARTICLE 5
Singapore’s economy poised for further growth as global demand shifts to Asean: panellists Singapore’s economy is poised for expansion as global demand shifts to Asean countries, largely due to supply chain disruptions, geopolitical conflicts and China’s zero-Covid policy, speakers at a panel discussion said on Wednesday (June 8). 
Chua Hak Bin, the co-head of macro research at Maybank’s investment banking group, said the reopening of borders in South-east Asia in recent months have given an “incredible boost” to Singapore’s first-quarter growth, with the momentum likely to persist in the second quarter Singapore’s gross domestic product grew 3.4 per cent in the first 3 months of 2022, and analysts are upbeat that growth will be stronger in the second quarter now that most Covid-19 restrictions and border control measures have been lifted. “Despite the challenging external environment, Asean countries have recorded steady growth and some countries, including Singapore, are benefiting from global diversion orders due to China’s lockdown,” said Chua on the first day of Maybank’s Invest Asean conference. He noted that even as China’s Purchasing Managers’ Index was in contraction in April and May, most of the Asean countries were not affected too much. In May, the Singapore Institute of Purchasing and Materials Management’s Purchasing Managers’ Index inched up by 0.1 point to 50.4 points, on the back of a faster expansion in new orders. Although Singapore is located in a region sandwiched by the United States and China, Chua said that Singapore’s active involvement in global trade pacts such as the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership has helped the country to attract foreign investment. On the issue of rising inflation, Hoe Ee Khor, the chief economist of the Asean+3 Macroeconomic Research Office, told the audience that the inflation rate in Asean countries of between 4.5 per cent and 5 per cent is “beyond the market forecast”. Singapore’s core inflation accelerated to 3.3 per cent year-on-year in April, the highest level since January 2012, driven by higher energy and food costs. Private sector economists and analysts expect the headline inflation to come in at 5 per cent this year, higher than the previous estimate of 3.6 per cent. “The higher cost for food and commodities also derailed Asean countries’ economies’ growth. The growth should be stronger than last year due to a low-base effect, but we are behind the curve,” he said. Hoe noted that for countries that have shown strong signs of economic recovery, there is a need to tighten monetary policy and remove costly stimulus packages in order to curb inflationary pressures.